README.md, before:

# workaround-zfs-on-luks-bug
workaround-zfs-on-luks-bug

# Introduction
Workaround from https://github.com/openzfs/zfs/issues/15646#issuecomment-1870937865 to fix a barrage of `zio` Errors in cases where Pool Free Space is heavilty fragmented (apparently).

There are some Limitations of the `losetup` Executable/Binary included by default in the Initramfs: it only provides a very lightweight Implementation, probably in order to limit the RAM Disk Size.

In particular the `--show` Option is NOT recognized, which makes it difficult to tell `losetup` to automatically do its Stuff (with `-f`) but NOT knowing which device it decided to use in the End.

For this reason, the Loop Device ID will need to be manually specified in the `/etc/looptab` Configuration File.

# Setup
Clone Repository:
```
git clone https://github.com/luckylinux/workaround-zfs-on-luks-bug.git
```

Run Setup (also in case of Updates):
```
./setup.sh
```

In case the Configuration File `/etc/looptab` does NOT exist, it will be created based on the Example File `etc/looptab` in this Repository.

# Automatic Conversion
An Automatic Conversion Script has been written for Convenience.

**Keep in Mind that this is based on my Setup and Naming Convention / Scheme so it will not / may not work for you.**
```
./auto_convert.sh
```

This takes care of Everything **except running the Setup Script**, namely:
- Generate Configuration File `/etc/looptab`
- Convert Devices using `zpool set path=xxxx rpool yyyy`
- Set Options in `/etc/default/zfs` to enforce the use of Cachefile
- (Re)generate Pool Cachefile in `/etc/zfs/zpool.cache`
- Regenerate Initramfs

# Configuration File
The File `/etc/looptab` is used to define the List of Devices to be setup.

```
# Configured Loop Devices
# The Separator between each Column (ID, Crypt Device / "Source", Loop Device Alias) **MUST** be a TAB (\t)
# ID    Source                                 			Symlink
0	/dev/mapper/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2XXXEXXXXXXX_crypt	/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2XXXEXXXXXXX_loop
1	/dev/mapper/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2XXXEXXXXXXX_crypt	/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2XXXEXXXXXXX_loop
...	...							...
```

You must do this for ALL Device that you want to be set up during Boot.

# Converting Devices
## Introduction
In order to switch from LUKS Device (`/dev/mapper/XXXX`) to Loop Device (`/dev/loop/XXXX`) as VDEV (Disk) member of a ZFS Pool, the following Commands can be used on ZFS 2.2+ in order to replace the Disks **WITHOUT**:
- Requiring a LiveUSB (`zpool export rpool; zpool import rpool -d /dev/loop/XXXX -d /dev/loop/YYYY`)
- Requiring a Resilver (`zpool offline XXXX; zpool detach XXXX; zpool attach rpool /dev/YYYY /dev/loop/XXXX`) - you [cannot replace a Disk with itself](https://github.com/openzfs/zfs/issues/2076)

## Get the Current Pool Information
In order to get the `vdev` Names to be Converted/Replaced/Migrated to Loop Devices, one can see the List of VDEVS in the `status` Output of `zpool`:
```
zpool status -v
```

This yields:
```
  pool: rpool
 state: ONLINE
status: One or more features are enabled on the pool despite not being
	requested by the 'compatibility' property.
action: Consider setting 'compatibility' to an appropriate value, or
	adding needed features to the relevant file in
	/etc/zfs/compatibility.d or /usr/share/zfs/compatibility.d.
  scan: scrub repaired 0B in 01:07:23 with 0 errors on Mon Aug 19 21:27:33 2024
config:

	NAME                                            STATE     READ WRITE CKSUM
	rpool                                           ONLINE       0     0     0
	  mirror-0                                      ONLINE       0     0     0
	    ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt      ONLINE       0     0     0
	    ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_crypt      ONLINE       0     0     0

errors: No known data errors

```


Or alternatively by running:
```
zpool get path rpool all-vdevs
```

This yields:
```
NAME    PROPERTY  VALUE  SOURCE
root-0  path      -      default
mirror-0  path      -      default
ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt  path      /dev/mapper/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt  -
ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_crypt  path      /dev/mapper/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_crypt  -
```

Make sure that ALL Devices you want to be set up during Boot are configured in the `/etc/looptab` File, then Issue:
```
/usr/sbin/looptab
```

In order to have an easy Copy-Paste Text, list all these newly created Devices:
```
ls -l /dev/loop/*
```

```
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10 Aug 20 14:50 /dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_loop -> /dev/loop1
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10 Aug 20 14:50 /dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_loop -> /dev/loop0
```

## Change Path of Disks/Devices/VDEVs
Set New Path for the First Disk:
```
zpool set path=/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_loop rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt
```

Set New Path for the Second Disk:
```
zpool set path=/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_loop rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_crypt
```

## Force ZFS to start using the new Devices
This is probably a BUG. See [BUG Report](https://github.com/openzfs/zfs/issues/16465).

In order for ZFS to **ACTUALLY** start using the newly introduced loop Devices, it is/might be (in all/some Circumstances) required to issue:
```
zpool reopen
```

and/or:

```
zpool reopen rpool
```

## (Optional) Run Scrub after changing Paths
(Optional) Run a Scrub after Changing Path(s):
```
zpool scrub rpool
```

Monitor Scrub Status:
```
watch 'zpool status -v'
```

## Change ZFS Boot/Import Options
Set Options in `/etc/default/zfs`:
```
# Setting ZPOOL_CACHE to an empty string ('') AND setting ZPOOL_IMPORT_OPTS to
# "-c /etc/zfs/zpool.cache" will _enforce_ the use of a cache file.
# This is needed in some cases (extreme amounts of VDEVs, multipath etc).
# Generally, the use of a cache file is usually not recommended on Linux
# because it sometimes is more trouble than it's worth (laptops with external
# devices or when/if device nodes changes names).
ZPOOL_IMPORT_OPTS="-c /etc/zfs/zpool.cache"
ZPOOL_CACHE=""
```

Make sure that all other `ZPOOL_IMPORT_OPTS` and `ZPOOL_CACHE` Lines are Commented !!!

## (Probably not needed anymore) Need to modify ZFS/OpenZFS initramfs Script
~~
This is required because, even if `PREREQ` is used correctly, for some Reason (to be investigated) the `looptab` Script (this Project) is executed BEFORE `clevis` even unlocks the Disks, so ZFS will either fall back to the `devid` or, in case the Cachefile is enfored, most likely just panic.
~~

This should **in principle** no longer be needed, since the Script is Stored in the `local-premount` Subfolder and NOT in the `local-top` Subfolder anymore !

Manually Open `/usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/zfs` and Change according to the Provided Diff File:
```diff
--- /usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/zfs	2024-08-20 15:14:18.170417535 +0200
+++ /usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/zfs	2024-08-20 15:17:11.195822061 +0200
@@ -228,6 +228,12 @@
 	[ "$quiet" != "y" ] && zfs_log_begin_msg \
 		"Importing pool '${pool}' using defaults"
 
+        # Setup Loopback Devices first
+        if [ -x "/usr/sbin/looptab" ]
+        then
+            echo "!!!! START /usr/sbin/looptab USING FALLBACK METHOD FROM ZFS INITRAMFS SCRIPT !!!!"
+            /usr/sbin/looptab
+            echo "!!!! END /usr/sbin/looptab USING FALLBACK METHOD FROM ZFS INITRAMFS SCRIPT !!!!"
+        fi
+
 	ZFS_CMD="${ZPOOL} import -N ${ZPOOL_FORCE} ${ZPOOL_IMPORT_OPTS}"
 	ZFS_STDERR="$($ZFS_CMD "$pool" 2>&1)"
 	ZFS_ERROR="$?"

```

Apply using:
```
patch --verbose -d/ -p0 <zfs-initramfs.patch
```


## (Re)generate Pool Cachefile

### From the System itself (Live System)
From the System itself, (re)generate `/etc/zfs/zpool.cache`:
```
zpool set cachefile=/etc/zfs/zpool.cache rpool
```

Regenerate initramfs:
```
update-initramfs -v -k all -u
```

### From LiveCD/LiveUSB (Chroot)
From within the **Chroot**, (re)generate `/etc/zfs/zpool.cache`:
```
zpool set cachefile=/etc/zfs/zpool.cache rpool
```

Regenerate initramfs:
```
update-initramfs -v -k all -u
```



## Complementary Information


## References
Documentation References:
- `man vdevprops`: The following native properties can be used to change the behavior of a vdev. 
                   `path`        The path to the device for this vdev
- `man zpool-get`: `zpool get all rpool all-vdevs`
- `man zpool-set`: `zpool set property=value rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt`


For Instance:
```
zpool get all rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt
```

Get the Current Path:
```
zpool get path rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt
```

# Troubleshooting Boot Issues
## Enable Debugging
In `/etc/default/grub.d/debug.cfg` set:
```
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX="${GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX} debug"
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="${GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT} debug"
```

On Debian/Ubuntu/etc Systems, run:
```
update-grub
```

## Netcat Server Setup
Make sure `firewalld` Systemd Service is stopped:
```
systemctl stop firewalld
```

Start Netcat Server (Debian Package `netcat-openbsd`):
```
TIMESTAMP=$(date +"%Y%m%d-%H%M%S"); FILENAME="file_${TIMESTAMP}.nc"; echo "Using Filename: ${FILENAME}"; echo ""; nc -v -l -k -p 12345 >> ${FILENAME}
```

Less Reliable Method - This might however lead to loss of several Lines/Messages:
```
TIMESTAMP=$(date +"%Y%m%d-%H%M%S"); FILENAME="file_${TIMESTAMP}.nc"; echo "Using Filename: ${FILENAME}"; echo ""; while true; do nc -v -l -p 12345 >> ${FILENAME} ;done;
```

## Netcat Client Setup
With Debian Package `netcat-openbsd` the following set of Options work as it's supposed to be:
```
echo "xxxx" | nc -N -n -v 192.168.3.66 12345
```

## Netcat Setup on the Machine to be Troubleshooted
The Netcat Configuration can be specified in `/etc/netcat`:
```
#!/bin/sh  

# Enable Verbose Output
set -x

# Netcat Debugging Configuration
NC_BIN="/usr/bin/nc-full"
NC_HOST="192.168.3.66"
NC_PORT="12345"
NC_OPTIONS="-N -n -v ${NC_HOST} ${NC_PORT}"
```

This will automatically be loaded by the `looptab-debug` Script (either in Initramfs/Chroot/Live System/etc).

## Disable clevis killing Networking
In order for the Client to be able to send Data to the Remote Netcat Server, it's essential to leave the Networking Up.

For this, the following Patch needs to be applied to ``:
```diff
--- /usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/local-bottom/clevis      2024-08-22 12:53:35.456685772 +0200
+++ /usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/local-bottom/clevis      2024-08-22 12:54:03.157203958 +0200
@@ -42,11 +42,12 @@
 # Not really worried about downing extra interfaces: they will come up
 # during the actual boot. Might make this configurable later if needed.
 
-for iface in /sys/class/net/*; do
-    if [ -e "$iface" ]; then
-        iface=$(basename "$iface")
-        ip link  set   dev "$iface" down
-        ip addr  flush dev "$iface"
-        ip route flush dev "$iface"
-    fi
-done
+# Disabled in order to allow looptab-debug to send Data to Remote Netcat Server
+#for iface in /sys/class/net/*; do
+#    if [ -e "$iface" ]; then
+#        iface=$(basename "$iface")
+#        ip link  set   dev "$iface" down
+#        ip addr  flush dev "$iface"
+#        ip route flush dev "$iface"
+#    fi
+#done
```

Apply using:
```
patch --verbose -d/ -p0 <clevis.patch
```


## Log using /etc/rc.local
Some Logging can be done by using `/etc/rc.local` to "Dump" everything that is needed to a `/var/log`.
Hopefully this happens soon enough before the System starts throwing `zio` errors but it's NOT guaranteed.

`/etc/rc.local/` Contents:
```
#!/bin/sh -e
#
# rc.local
#
# This script is executed at the end of each multiuser runlevel.
# Make sure that the script will "exit 0" on success or any other
# value on error.
#
# In order to enable or disable this script just change the execution
# bits.
#
# By default this script does nothing.

# Generate Timestamp
TIMESTAMP=$(date +"%Y%m%d-%H%M%S")

# Copy /run/initramfs/initramfs.debug to /var/log/initramfs.debug.$TIMESTAMP
if [ -f "/run/initramfs/initramfs.debug" ]
then
   cp "/run/initramfs/initramfs.debug" "/var/log/initramfs.debug.$TIMESTAMP"
fi

# Dump dmesg to /var/log/dmesg.debug.$TIMESTAMP 
echo "Dumping dmesg to /var/log/dmesg.debug.$TIMESTAMP"
dmesg > "/var/log/dmesg.debug.$TIMESTAMP" 2>&1

# Copy /run/initramfs/iostat.debug to /var/log/iostat.debug.$TIMESTAMP
if [ -f "/run/initramfs/iostat.debug" ]
then
   cp "/run/initramfs/iostat.debug" "/var/log/iostat.debug.$TIMESTAMP"
fi

# Execute the "full" looptab-debug on the Live System
/usr/sbin/looptab-debug "/etc/rc.local" "Live System just after Boot"

# Force zpool reopen
#zpool reopen
#zpool reopen rpool

# Exit status
exit 0
```

Enable `/etc/rc.local` on Debian based Systems:
```
# Make it executable
chmod +x /etc/rc.local

# Create Systemd service to enable /etc/rc.local
mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system
tee /etc/systemd/system/rc-local.service <<EOF 

[Unit]
 Description=/etc/rc.local Compatibility
 ConditionPathExists=/etc/rc.local

[Service]
 Type=forking
 ExecStart=/etc/rc.local start
 TimeoutSec=0
 StandardOutput=tty
 RemainAfterExit=yes
 SysVStartPriority=99

[Install]
 WantedBy=multi-user.target
EOF

# Enable & start service
systemctl enable rc-local.service
systemctl start rc-local.service
systemctl status rc-local.service
```

# Old Stuff
Replace Drives and Fix Path (Second Attempt - Device Paths were changed back to devid since the Loop Device couldn't be found)

```
zpool set path=/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_loop rpool dm-uuid-CRYPT-LUKS2-b5ed1ef4aecb4404b68229f2a8a253c3-ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt
```

```
zpool set path=/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_loop rpool dm-uuid-CRYPT-LUKS2-471885256c014364874b5ddc0ee2dca3-ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_crypt
```

Regenerate Cachefile
```
zpool set cachefile=/etc/zfs/zpool.cache rpool
```

Regenerate initramfs:
```
update-initramfs -v -k all -u
```

Commit message:

Added some notes about Development and how Busybox included binaries are very limited/different in terms of Features.

README.md, after:

# workaround-zfs-on-luks-bug
workaround-zfs-on-luks-bug

# Introduction
Workaround from https://github.com/openzfs/zfs/issues/15646#issuecomment-1870937865 to fix a barrage of `zio` Errors in cases where Pool Free Space is heavilty fragmented (apparently).

There are some Limitations of the `losetup` Executable/Binary included by default in the Initramfs: it only provides a very lightweight Implementation, probably in order to limit the RAM Disk Size.

In particular the `--show` Option is NOT recognized, which makes it difficult to tell `losetup` to automatically do its Stuff (with `-f`) but NOT knowing which device it decided to use in the End.

For this reason, the Loop Device ID will need to be manually specified in the `/etc/looptab` Configuration File.

# Setup
Clone Repository:
```
git clone https://github.com/luckylinux/workaround-zfs-on-luks-bug.git
```

Run Setup (also in case of Updates):
```
./setup.sh
```

In case the Configuration File `/etc/looptab` does NOT exist, it will be created based on the Example File `etc/looptab` in this Repository.

# Automatic Conversion
An Automatic Conversion Script has been written for Convenience.

**Keep in Mind that this is based on my Setup and Naming Convention / Scheme so it will not / may not work for you.**
```
./auto_convert.sh
```

This takes care of Everything **except running the Setup Script**, namely:
- Generate Configuration File `/etc/looptab`
- Convert Devices using `zpool set path=xxxx rpool yyyy`
- Set Options in `/etc/default/zfs` to enforce the use of Cachefile
- (Re)generate Pool Cachefile in `/etc/zfs/zpool.cache`
- Regenerate Initramfs

# Configuration File
The File `/etc/looptab` is used to define the List of Devices to be setup.

```
# Configured Loop Devices
# The Separator between each Column (ID, Crypt Device / "Source", Loop Device Alias) **MUST** be a TAB (\t)
# ID    Source                                 			Symlink
0	/dev/mapper/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2XXXEXXXXXXX_crypt	/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2XXXEXXXXXXX_loop
1	/dev/mapper/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2XXXEXXXXXXX_crypt	/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2XXXEXXXXXXX_loop
...	...							...
```

You must do this for ALL Device that you want to be set up during Boot.

# Converting Devices
## Introduction
In order to switch from LUKS Device (`/dev/mapper/XXXX`) to Loop Device (`/dev/loop/XXXX`) as VDEV (Disk) member of a ZFS Pool, the following Commands can be used on ZFS 2.2+ in order to replace the Disks **WITHOUT**:
- Requiring a LiveUSB (`zpool export rpool; zpool import rpool -d /dev/loop/XXXX -d /dev/loop/YYYY`)
- Requiring a Resilver (`zpool offline XXXX; zpool detach XXXX; zpool attach rpool /dev/YYYY /dev/loop/XXXX`) - you [cannot replace a Disk with itself](https://github.com/openzfs/zfs/issues/2076)

## Get the Current Pool Information
In order to get the `vdev` Names to be Converted/Replaced/Migrated to Loop Devices, one can see the List of VDEVS in the `status` Output of `zpool`:
```
zpool status -v
```

This yields:
```
  pool: rpool
 state: ONLINE
status: One or more features are enabled on the pool despite not being
	requested by the 'compatibility' property.
action: Consider setting 'compatibility' to an appropriate value, or
	adding needed features to the relevant file in
	/etc/zfs/compatibility.d or /usr/share/zfs/compatibility.d.
  scan: scrub repaired 0B in 01:07:23 with 0 errors on Mon Aug 19 21:27:33 2024
config:

	NAME                                            STATE     READ WRITE CKSUM
	rpool                                           ONLINE       0     0     0
	  mirror-0                                      ONLINE       0     0     0
	    ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt      ONLINE       0     0     0
	    ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_crypt      ONLINE       0     0     0

errors: No known data errors

```


Or alternatively by running:
```
zpool get path rpool all-vdevs
```

This yields:
```
NAME    PROPERTY  VALUE  SOURCE
root-0  path      -      default
mirror-0  path      -      default
ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt  path      /dev/mapper/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt  -
ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_crypt  path      /dev/mapper/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_crypt  -
```

Make sure that ALL Devices you want to be set up during Boot are configured in the `/etc/looptab` File, then Issue:
```
/usr/sbin/looptab
```

In order to have an easy Copy-Paste Text, list all these newly created Devices:
```
ls -l /dev/loop/*
```

```
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10 Aug 20 14:50 /dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_loop -> /dev/loop1
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 10 Aug 20 14:50 /dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_loop -> /dev/loop0
```

## Change Path of Disks/Devices/VDEVs
Set New Path for the First Disk:
```
zpool set path=/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_loop rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt
```

Set New Path for the Second Disk:
```
zpool set path=/dev/loop/ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_loop rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2302E69AD9D0_crypt
```

## Force ZFS to start using the new Devices
This is probably a BUG. See [BUG Report](https://github.com/openzfs/zfs/issues/16465).

In order for ZFS to **ACTUALLY** start using the newly introduced loop Devices, it is/might be (in all/some Circumstances) required to issue:
```
zpool reopen
```

and/or:

```
zpool reopen rpool
```

## (Optional) Run Scrub after changing Paths
(Optional) Run a Scrub after Changing Path(s):
```
zpool scrub rpool
```

Monitor Scrub Status:
```
watch 'zpool status -v'
```

## Change ZFS Boot/Import Options
Set Options in `/etc/default/zfs`:
```
# Setting ZPOOL_CACHE to an empty string ('') AND setting ZPOOL_IMPORT_OPTS to
# "-c /etc/zfs/zpool.cache" will _enforce_ the use of a cache file.
# This is needed in some cases (extreme amounts of VDEVs, multipath etc).
# Generally, the use of a cache file is usually not recommended on Linux
# because it sometimes is more trouble than it's worth (laptops with external
# devices or when/if device nodes changes names).
ZPOOL_IMPORT_OPTS="-c /etc/zfs/zpool.cache"
ZPOOL_CACHE=""
```

Make sure that all other `ZPOOL_IMPORT_OPTS` and `ZPOOL_CACHE` Lines are Commented !!!

## (Probably not needed anymore) Need to modify ZFS/OpenZFS initramfs Script
~~
This is required because, even if `PREREQ` is used correctly, for some Reason (to be investigated) the `looptab` Script (this Project) is executed BEFORE `clevis` even unlocks the Disks, so ZFS will either fall back to the `devid` or, in case the Cachefile is enfored, most likely just panic.
~~

This should **in principle** no longer be needed, since the Script is Stored in the `local-premount` Subfolder and NOT in the `local-top` Subfolder anymore !

Manually Open `/usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/zfs` and Change according to the Provided Diff File:
```diff
--- /usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/zfs	2024-08-20 15:14:18.170417535 +0200
+++ /usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/zfs	2024-08-20 15:17:11.195822061 +0200
@@ -228,6 +228,12 @@
 	[ "$quiet" != "y" ] && zfs_log_begin_msg \
 		"Importing pool '${pool}' using defaults"
 
+        # Setup Loopback Devices first
+        if [ -x "/usr/sbin/looptab" ]
+        then
+            echo "!!!! START /usr/sbin/looptab USING FALLBACK METHOD FROM ZFS INITRAMFS SCRIPT !!!!"
+            /usr/sbin/looptab
+            echo "!!!! END /usr/sbin/looptab USING FALLBACK METHOD FROM ZFS INITRAMFS SCRIPT !!!!"
+        fi
+
 	ZFS_CMD="${ZPOOL} import -N ${ZPOOL_FORCE} ${ZPOOL_IMPORT_OPTS}"
 	ZFS_STDERR="$($ZFS_CMD "$pool" 2>&1)"
 	ZFS_ERROR="$?"

```

Apply using:
```
patch --verbose -d/ -p0 <zfs-initramfs.patch
```


## (Re)generate Pool Cachefile

### From the System itself (Live System)
From the System itself, (re)generate `/etc/zfs/zpool.cache`:
```
zpool set cachefile=/etc/zfs/zpool.cache rpool
```

Regenerate initramfs:
```
update-initramfs -v -k all -u
```

### From LiveCD/LiveUSB (Chroot)
From within the **Chroot**, (re)generate `/etc/zfs/zpool.cache`:
```
zpool set cachefile=/etc/zfs/zpool.cache rpool
```

Regenerate initramfs:
```
update-initramfs -v -k all -u
```



## Complementary Information


## References
Documentation References:
- `man vdevprops`: The following native properties can be used to change the behavior of a vdev. 
                   `path`        The path to the device for this vdev
- `man zpool-get`: `zpool get all rpool all-vdevs`
- `man zpool-set`: `zpool set property=value rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt`


For Instance:
```
zpool get all rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt
```

Get the Current Path:
```
zpool get path rpool ata-CT1000MX500SSD1_2301E6992CB7_crypt
```

# Troubleshooting Boot Issues
## Enable Debugging
In `/etc/default/grub.d/debug.cfg` set:
```
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX="${GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX} debug"
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="${GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT} debug"
```

On Debian/Ubuntu/etc Systems, run:
```
update-grub
```

## Netcat Server Setup
Make sure `firewalld` Systemd Service is stopped:
```
systemctl stop firewalld
```

Start Netcat Server (Debian Package `netcat-openbsd`):
```
TIMESTAMP=$(date +"%Y%m%d-%H%M%S"); FILENAME="file_${TIMESTAMP}.nc"; echo "Using Filename: ${FILENAME}"; echo ""; nc -v -l -k -p 12345 >> ${FILENAME}
```

Less Reliable Method - This might however lead to loss of several Lines/Messages:
```
TIMESTAMP=$(date +"%Y%m%d-%H%M%S"); FILENAME="file_${TIMESTAMP}.nc"; echo "Using Filename: ${FILENAME}"; echo ""; while true; do nc -v -l -p 12345 >> ${FILENAME} ;done;
```

## Netcat Client Setup
With Debian Package `netcat-openbsd` the following set of Options work as it's supposed to be:
```
echo "xxxx" | nc -N -n -v 192.168.3.66 12345
```

## Netcat Setup on the Machine to be Troubleshooted
The Netcat Configuration can be specified in `/etc/netcat`:
```
#!/bin/sh  

# Enable Verbose Output
set -x

# Netcat Debugging Configuration
NC_BIN="/usr/bin/nc-full"
NC_HOST="192.168.3.66"
NC_PORT="12345"
NC_OPTIONS="-N -n -v ${NC_HOST} ${NC_PORT}"
```

This will automatically be loaded by the `looptab-debug` Script (either in Initramfs/Chroot/Live System/etc).

## Disable clevis killing Networking
In order for the Client to be able to send Data to the Remote Netcat Server, it's essential to leave the Networking Up.

For this, the following Patch needs to be applied to ``:
```diff
--- /usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/local-bottom/clevis      2024-08-22 12:53:35.456685772 +0200
+++ /usr/share/initramfs-tools/scripts/local-bottom/clevis      2024-08-22 12:54:03.157203958 +0200
@@ -42,11 +42,12 @@
 # Not really worried about downing extra interfaces: they will come up
 # during the actual boot. Might make this configurable later if needed.
 
-for iface in /sys/class/net/*; do
-    if [ -e "$iface" ]; then
-        iface=$(basename "$iface")
-        ip link  set   dev "$iface" down
-        ip addr  flush dev "$iface"
-        ip route flush dev "$iface"
-    fi
-done
+# Disabled in order to allow looptab-debug to send Data to Remote Netcat Server
+#for iface in /sys/class/net/*; do
+#    if [ -e "$iface" ]; then
+#        iface=$(basename "$iface")
+#        ip link  set   dev "$iface" down
+#        ip addr  flush dev "$iface"
+#        ip route flush dev "$iface"
+#    fi
+#done
```

Apply using:
```
patch --verbose -d/ -p0 <clevis.patch
```


## Log using /etc/rc.local
Some Logging can be done by using `/etc/rc.local` to "Dump" everything that is needed to a `/var/log`.
Hopefully this happens soon enough before the System starts throwing `zio` errors but it's NOT guaranteed.

`/etc/rc.local/` Contents:
```
#!/bin/sh -e
#
# rc.local
#
# This script is executed at the end of each multiuser runlevel.
# Make sure that the script will "exit 0" on success or any other
# value on error.
#
# In order to enable or disable this script just change the execution
# bits.
#
# By default this script does nothing.

# Generate Timestamp
TIMESTAMP=$(date +"%Y%m%d-%H%M%S")

# Copy /run/initramfs/initramfs.debug to /var/log/initramfs.debug.$TIMESTAMP
if [ -f "/run/initramfs/initramfs.debug" ]
then
   cp "/run/initramfs/initramfs.debug" "/var/log/initramfs.debug.$TIMESTAMP"
fi

# Dump dmesg to /var/log/dmesg.debug.$TIMESTAMP 
echo "Dumping dmesg to /var/log/dmesg.debug.$TIMESTAMP"
dmesg > "/var/log/dmesg.debug.$TIMESTAMP" 2>&1

# Copy /run/initramfs/iostat.debug to /var/log/iostat.debug.$TIMESTAMP
if [ -f "/run/initramfs/iostat.debug" ]
then
   cp "/run/initramfs/iostat.debug" "/var/log/iostat.debug.$TIMESTAMP"
fi

# Execute the "full" looptab-debug on the Live System
/usr/sbin/looptab-debug "/etc/rc.local" "Live System just after Boot"

# Force zpool reopen
#zpool reopen
#zpool reopen rpool

# Exit status
exit 0
```

Enable `/etc/rc.local` on Debian based Systems:
```
# Make it executable
chmod +x /etc/rc.local

# Create Systemd service to enable /etc/rc.local
mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system
tee /etc/systemd/system/rc-local.service <<EOF 

[Unit]
 Description=/etc/rc.local Compatibility
 ConditionPathExists=/etc/rc.local

[Service]
 Type=forking
 ExecStart=/etc/rc.local start
 TimeoutSec=0
 StandardOutput=tty
 RemainAfterExit=yes
 SysVStartPriority=99

[Install]
 WantedBy=multi-user.target
EOF

# Enable & start service
systemctl enable rc-local.service
systemctl start rc-local.service
systemctl status rc-local.service
```

# Development
In order to test that Things are **actually** working the way the **should**, it's not sufficient to run the `/usr/sbin/looptab-debug` on a Modern System.

That would most likely run under the `bash` Shell or possibly the `zsh` Shell, depending on your System Configuration.

Even when running using the `dash` Shell, the Behaviour is quite significantly different compared to what happens in Initramfs.

For this reason it's suggested to first invoke the `busybox` Shell:
```
/usr/bin/busybox sh
```

And run the `looptab-debug` Script from there:
```
/usr/sbin/looptab-debug
```

Or in one Command:
```
/usr/bin/busybox sh -c /usr/sbin/looptab-debug
```

Keep in mind that many Binaries/Executables in the initramfs Shell are "minimal" Versions of their "normal" (full-fledged) self.
This applies for instance to:
- (Confirmed) `losetup` (several flags are NOT recognized by the default `losetup` Binary included in initramfs, which is why `losetup-full` has been included as the "full" Version)
- (Probably) `nc` (included `nc-full` to ensure consistency between initramfs and the normal/chroot System, so `nc` expects/uses the same Flags)
